my name is adina i'm part of the
psycho-informatics lab
in the institute of neuroscience and
medicine in the brain and behavior
institute
and today i'm going to give an
introduction to datalit
a software tool that we are developing
with a focus on machine learning
application
if you want to get the slides because
they can be useful for you to follow the
links that i've put in them
i have pasted the link into the chat and
you can download them
from github i want to start
with acknowledgements the most important
thing
first because datalit is a software tool
that is and has been developed by a
large
number of people in a large u.s
and german collaboration uh one part of
uh that collaboration is here in the
afza yacht in the im7
led by michael hunker the other one is
at dartmouth college
and i myself am the leader of the
documentation project
um through which also many many people
have contributed were
funded and i want to highlight our
funders and collaborators here
yes so i also want to highlight
that while i'm giving the talk here
today
i'm only here for two hours you can quiz
me with any question
that you have but importantly everything
that i'm talking about
is already documented in depth elsewhere
so if
there are any questions that you have at
a later point then
you can find resources to
get answers to your questions or to ask
those questions to us
the most important resource is the
datalet handbook you can find it at
handbook.datalet.org
and this is a website that is a
collection of
all of the user-facing tutorials that we
have created over the
duration of this documentation project
you can find general introduction
and information and installation
information about the tool
you can find a hands-on introductory
tutorial
that takes you throughout the basics of
the tool you can find
content on advanced things that you can
do with dataled and you can find use
cases
where you can read up on what's possible
with datalite
in particularly relevant maybe the use
cases that
were created in particular for this
session today and if you're not into
text-based resources then we have a
datalet youtube channel
where we upload all of our talks and
tutorials
at this point i also want to highlight
that we are recording this talk
and i think that we are only recording
what i'm screen sharing but if you want
to make sure that your face is not seen
on the recording then please feel free
to disable your video at any point
so just as a disclaimer we are recording
this and we plan to
publish it later uh on our public
youtube channel
okay if you have questions over the
course
of the um of this presentation
because this is a virtual presentation
and
things are a little bit more complex if
i don't have an audience that i can
actually see
then please ask them right away if they
are concerning something that i'm
currently talking about
you can first write them in the chat if
i don't react speak up because i'm not
having
good access to the chat if you have a
specific use case that you want to
ask specific questions for then i'm
happy to discuss that at the end of the
talk
and if you have questions at a later
point then you can
ask all of us the core developers and
many other people that use data ladder
contribute to it in our matrix channel
or via negative issues but we are very
responsive
i also have a live polling system in
place to make this virtual
a talk a little bit more interactive and
i would ask everyone
to just grab their phones and scan this
qr code
or go to this url i'm also going to
paste that
into the chat in a second
and in this
in this um live poll
you will be able to answer questions
that i'm
asking let us check the live polling
system i've just started the poll
so you should now be able on your phones
or in the browser to answer
the questions that i'm showing you
awesome that seems to work quite well
i hope the other place that someone is
joining from is much nicer
than any of the other alternatives maybe
the beach
or somewhere wow there are many people
here
okay cool let me get a grasp of the
audience that i'm facing today i would
be interested in finding out which
institute you are affiliated with
just to get a general grasp we have sent
the invitation to all of the institutes
so it would be good to see who who was
interested
cool it's awesome to see so many
institutes represented here
i'm still giving a couple more seconds
awesome thank you
all right something else that i would be
curious to know
is whether you have used datalet before
or if you haven't used it yet if you
have at least
heard about it just to get an idea of
how in-depth and detailed i will talk
about certain things
very nice thank you very much and then a
last question
right at the beginning um which
operating system
do you do you use for work linux mac os
or windows and that's
also relevant for me um because this
is a tutorial that's meant both as a
presentation
and as a live coding tutorial uh
for which you are invited to code along
and it helps to get a get an idea of
which operating systems
are present here and it seems like it's
evenly distributed
awesome oh that someone raised their
hand
um please speak up if you want to say
something
i got a notification ego and zimmerman
raised their hand
no that's just that what's wrong sorry
okay
okay but it works so you can also raise
your hand then i get a
pop up a nice pop-up notification so
that's also one way to
indicate that you have a question
awesome so um
let me um start by explaining the live
coding i have my terminal right next to
the slides and i will later use it
to have a code executed there i'm going
to do this
in a x term terminal so my terminal here
is remote control that
you won't see me typing you will see a
remote control terminal
but you can code along with copy and
paste code snippets if you want to do
this
then you can go um it's a little bit
smaller you can go to
a handbook. again then scroll down
all the way to the bottom of the page
and
the last section is the code list from
chapter section
and there you want to click on
introduction to data that will focus on
ml
and then you can see all of the code
snippets that i will be executing and
you can copy and paste them into your
own terminal if you want to
cool if you want to code along then you
will need to have datalit installed
and if you want to code along for the
more advanced parts in the end then you
will need to have a data.extension
install datalit containers
and the software singularity you still
have a couple of minutes to do that if
you're interested in doing that
because i will um uh now go through the
core features
later that so first things first datalit
is a command line tool it's available
for our major operating system so linux
mac os and windows
and it's free in open source mit license
software it is
built on top of two version control
tools git and gitanics
and data that if i want to sum it up in
a couple of catchy phrases
allows to version control arbitrarily
large content
this for example enables you to version
control
not only code or software but also data
alongside each other it
provides transport mechanisms for
sharing and obtaining data
so you can consume and collaborate on
data
or data analysis as you may be used to
in software development
and it provides means to create
computationally reproducible data
analysis
and it allows you to track and also
share the provenance of all digital
objects that you create in your research
datalite has also many more features but
these are the
things that i'm going to focus on today
also
data that is completely domain agnostic
it's been
heavily used in the neurosciences and
some of the things that i'm showing here
will
be using neural imaging data but it can
be used for anything
you can also version control your music
library with it
and it is not bound to any specific data
type
or scientific area or what not
so i'm going to quickly give you a
run-through of all of the core concepts
and features i want to talk about
and then i'm going to start with the
general introduction
uh with a quota long tutorial for these
core concepts
and later i'm going to focus on a
concrete and more complex machine
learning application
so among the most important
things to to know is that everything
that we do with data that happens in
so-called data-led data sets
those are data that's core data
structure
and you create you can create them in
as new directory or you can transform
existing directories into data sets you
can also get them from elsewhere
once you have a data set then
it feels like a usual directory on your
computer and the slide i have included
a screenshot of um
a data data set one from the file viewer
on the left and one from my terminal
view on the right and this is just
a regular directory as you would have
typically on your computer a dataset
as a little bit of technical background
is a git kit annex repository
if you don't know what git academics are
that isn't super relevant and you won't
need it to understand what i'm talking
about
but um it means uh
what what what i want to highlight is
that it's completely content agnostic
that there are no custom data structures
involved that you would need to use
and that those tools and in turn also
data led and data data sets
are built for complete decentralization
so with you using data like you don't
need a central server
or a central service everything can
be hosted on your local machine on your
local
private laptop and that would be enough
data sets can version control
arbitrarily large files
so you can place files of any size into
a data set
and save them in order to version
control them and later on
save all of the modifications you do to
these files
and you can stay flexible in your use of
this version control feature
you can decide to use a non-complex
core api of datalet that will help you
get started with version control if you
have never used a tool like git or with
nx before
or if you have students that are new to
data management but
if you are a git organics user then you
can also just use pure git organic
commands if you want to
if this is something that you're more
comfortable with
a data set because it has those version
control features
creates a history that you can use and
interact with you can see a screenshot
of one view of such a history of the
data set that i've created
and you can see that everything that
i've done in a data set on the right
hand side
hand side is summarized with a small
change summary of what i've done here
and with an author that created the
change and with the date of when this
change happened i could also go deeper
into this history and see precisely
what has been done this history can be
used for various things it's a
git history for everyone who's familiar
with it you
once you have this history you can reset
the complete data set or subsets
of it to a previous state so you can
travel back in time
and check out previous versions you can
revert changes that you have done
so that you are not happy with for
example or you can also bring them back
you can find out what was done when how
why and by whom and that's regardless of
if it's your own data set or if it's a
data set that someone else has shared
with you
so everything that has been done in a
data set is
transparent to the ones that that you've
shared with you can
share the complete provenance history of
everything that has happened
and you can identify every file or
subset of the data set in precise
versions this
i will show you later enables you to for
example
use data in the most recent version or
the version
that the data was in in 2018 or at
another
point in time and so forth you can
consume data sets and collaborate with
datasets so if you have a dataset
then you can share it either on the same
computer infrastructure
or to a different place for example
repository hosting services such as
github or cloud storage services
and others can take those data sets and
uh either get their data or collaborate
with you and likewise
you can consume existing data sets and
datalab provides easy updating
mechanisms that allow you to integrate
changes that the
creator of the dataset or collaborator
on your dataset has made into your own
dataset
dataled creates machine-readable and
re-executable provenance
of the things that have been done in a
dataset
so what it can do for example is to
link input code containerized software
environments
and the results of the computation or
command execution
into a both machine and human readable
record
that a machine is later capable of
re-executing automatically
and it can capture and store the origin
of files
so that you have both a record of how
files were created
or if they haven't been created by you
where they have
come from and
datalet allows for a seamless nesting
and dataset linkage mechanism
it's not really straightforward
immediately
how this can be useful but there's a
glimpse of what it
can do here in this slide it allows you
to for example create a complete
provenance record or complete lineage
of let's say the raw data up to the
published results
in a paper without sacrificing
interpretability or intuitive structure
and i would like to show you in a
concrete example of how this nesting can
become really useful
to create intuitively structured and
reusable analysis components
and datalit is built for integration
with all kinds of third-party um
storages
so even though it is completely
decentralized and your local compute
infrastructure be that your private
laptop or the jsc
is the perfect place for datalet to work
and for your datasets to be
you can also host your datasets in all
major
third-party repository hosting services
let's say github
gitlab gin bitbucket and so forth and
also cloud storage services for example
google drive
or stuff like the open sign spring
here are some concrete examples of what
people use data that network
one thing that many people do is to
publish or consume data sets
via public facing services for example
guitar
you can see in the screenshot a github
repository that is actually
a published quite large memory imaging
data set
i can then get the url
of this data set of this repository
clone it and subsequently i have access
to several dozens of gigabytes of data
that are shared in this dataset
all publicly available via github and
coincidentally i will also have
access to the complete history and so
forth but i will show that later
another thing that datalet can be used
for is to create and share reproducible
and open science
here is another github repository public
facing for everyone
and it says that it has codes data and
the manuscript
for the paper that this doi links to
it's a paper that has been published
earlier this year by us
and if i then clone this repository
again this
can be done by everyone it's completely
public facing
then i don't only have access to the
code and data that is shared inside of
this repository
but i also have access to the provenance
history of everything that has been done
and i can
find out what has been done from the raw
data to the result that i report in the
paper
and this is an example that you can
check out on github it's actually a
completely
reproducible and dynamically generated
manuscript so
you can clone this data set and you can
build the manuscript including
uh freshly generated results from
scratch
another thing that we use data that for
in the im7 is for central data
management
and archive and this is a screenshot of
our gitlab instance
and in there we have a collection of all
of the
large neural imaging data sets that
aren't publicly shared but that we have
packaged up in data data sets
and we expose them via gitlab for
everyone to clone
and we actually join them
into a so-called super dataset
which when cloned gives access to all of
the
hundreds of terabytes of data that we
have packaged up
in the institute for
our data management system
okay and now i'm going to demo the
basics of data that
in the terminal and if you want to you
can go to the shared
link and copy paste the code snippets
into your own terminal to follow along
let me see if i get this to work perfect
so i've said that you need to have data
light installed
and here's a quick check of whether it's
the correct version if you type
something like this into your terminal
then you should get data led with a
version number that should be higher
than
o12 what i've
also what i also what i'm also showing
here is if you have never used dataled
um is how to configure a
git identity i will later come back to
why this becomes relevant but this is
also
a requirement or a configuration that
you should do prior to starting
uh with datalite so um
quickly back to the basics so datalit is
command line as a command line tool
so you have seen that i have used it in
the command line with
data lab prepended by some
command or a flag but it has also a
python api
um and if i would want to use it in a
python session or in the script then i'm
quickly showing you how you would be
able to import data that's api
for example with the following line and
this
allows you to use datalit and its
functionality also in scripts
it has a python api um but
it doesn't prevent you from using data
and other sorts of scripts so if you
have a matlab script for example you can
still have access to
data that's functions um via system
calls for example
i okay i will start by showing you
um how to create a data like data set
first
that's data let's call data structure
and you create can
create a new data set that you can
populate on your local computer
with the datalit create command this
command
only needs a name of the directory that
shall be
created so i'm running data that create
myanalysis
and that will create a new dataset
called my analysis of my computer
and what you can also see here is that
i'm attaching a configuration option
that will generate a useful structure in
my dataset that is useful for
analyses but i will later
explain the details of why i have done
this
if i execute this command then datalite
will create this new directory that i
can
now cd so change directory into
and i can check out the contents because
the configuration has populated this
directory already with some useful
things that are nice to have in a data
analysis namely
a code directory so that i'm encouraged
to place my
scripts in there and some readmes and
change logs with
placeholders so that i'm encouraged to
document everything i'm doing
if i take a closer look by listing all
of the files
also the hidden files in my dataset then
i can see
that there are some hidden directories
and files so for example the
data lab and the git directory that show
you that
there are some version control tools
that are working
in the background
so great that so many people have
already answered that question here uh
before i start with the version control
feature of datalite i would like to know
whether
you are familiar with using version
control tools
such as git
i'm not too familiar
[Music]
thanks for the feedback it's fantastic
that so many people are using it
uh or have used it that's really cool uh
i will
quickly use a minute to explain what um
version control is
for those that have not heard about yet
my go-to example is wikipedia if you go
to wikipedia then that's a collaborative
space where people can share knowledge
and you can have an article on wikipedia
and add information to it
by logging into your wikipedia account
and
then proposing a change to the article
by typing your change into a small
window
and then summarizing that change and
submitting it
the article will be updated right away
and it will importantly not change its
url or its file name
so even though if you have edited a
wikipedia article
the article has changed it will still be
the same
file name the same file url that
everyone can access
this is
a stark contrast to what is depicted
here in this comic
where a document is changed
but instead of saving it under the same
name
these miniscule changes are just
reflected by
more and more complex file names so this
comic depicts a
directory that will end up with hundreds
of files
with slightly changed file names and
each of these file has a min-skill
change
in wikipedia articles there's a version
control system in place that prevents
that
at the same time each wikipedia article
has a history of what has been done to
it
so you can go to any history of the
wikipedia article
and find out who has added which
information at which point
and if you would go to the article of
pope francis and then add
information such as he was a
phenomenal strip poker player then
someone else
will quickly notice this change will
identify
the change that you have made in the
history and is then able to revert that
change because
he was he or she were able to interact
with the history of the wikipedia
so version control is one way
to keep things very organized instead of
cluttering files with
changing file names you have a linear
history of your files
with changes that you can use
to where you can keep track of changes
and you can revert changes or go back
to previous states with version control
now typically version control is only
used for small files
let's say code let's say
manuscripts but it's important to also
apply this
to larger files and that's possible with
data light
dataled in principle knows two things
datasets and files
we have already created a dataset and
everything that you put into a dataset
can now be version controlled
and it always happens with the same
command and i'm going to show you how
this looks like now
what i'm showcasing here first is
i will edit one of the readme files that
is in the dataset
they are already in the data set and
thus are version controlled
and if i execute this command here then
i will just echo an empty space into the
readme
i'm doing this because i have a remote
control terminal but what i'm
essentially doing
is i'm just deleting the placeholder
contents of that readme
i can now that i've made a change
into a file that is version controlled
find out what has changed um
the command that lets me do this is for
example
the data let's status command this
command will report on the current
status
of the data set and if i execute it then
it will tell me that one of the files
given to it for version control has been
modified so changed from its previously
known state
i can get more details on this
precise change by asking it to
report the change to if i ask it to do
this then i can actually see
the precise lines that have been removed
all of those
are highlighted in red and the line that
has been
added this one is green with a small
plus
i will also remove the placeholders from
the written file that is in the code
directory
here's a summary of all of the
modifications that are currently in the
data set
so both the readme in the root of the
data set and the readme the code
directory has currently
lost the placeholders in the in the
in the if i now think that's a great
change i want to
version control this then i can use the
data let's save command
to save the current state of the data
set
what you can see here is that i'm using
the dash m
that's short for message option to
attach a short summary of what i have
done here
this is a good practice because it helps
me to create
a nice and human readable history in my
data set that others
and my future self can understand more
easily if i execute this
then it will add the modifications that
i've done
to these two files to my data set and
that's all that version control is
i um something that
i want to address here because version
control is so simple that we can now
practice
good practices is that the data led safe
command
saved all of the modifications in the
data set
and that's something that you want to be
mindful of if you have
several changes in your data set i'm
going to
do two changes now
first of all i'm going to
add something to my readme you can do
this too with an editor of your choice
and the next change i'm going to do
so here's here's the difference that
i've introduced the next change that i'm
going to do is i'm just going to
download a file from the web it's a
funny comic that i like and add it to
the data set
if i then query the data set state you
can see
that there are two modifications in my
data set now
what i want to draw your attention to is
that these two changes
are very unrelated to each other there
is a readme change and there is a new
file
and i wouldn't want to save them into
the same commit or into the same
save message because they don't have
much in common
and i'm always inclined to do
incremental changes
that make sense when reverted
as one unit if i ever want to revert
that readme change then i want to make
sure
that when reverting this one save
operation
i don't also want to get rid of the file
that i've added
and one way to only save
a single change or some changes in the
data set is by
adding a path to the data let's save
command so if i'm adding
readme as a path to the datelet save
command i'm making sure that i'm
only adding something to the readme
and then i can do another save in this
case i don't need
a path anymore because there's only one
change left to add
the additional file that i have included
here
so procedurally version control has
gotten really really easy
if you're used to git then you can see
that i'm skipping a couple of
git commands uh or combining a couple of
git commands all with the data let's
save command
you just need to add a change to a data
set or modify a file that is in there
and then save this change with a
meaningful commit message
it is advised to save only meaningful
units of change
and to also attach a helpful commit
message to it
and because you can save anything that
is in your data set
this means that you can also version
control data so if you have just
acquired a neural imaging study
then you can take all of these gigabytes
of data and just run your data that's
saved on them to version control them
and save them into your data center
now the data set
has started to get uh or to to build
data set history and i'm going to
demonstrate this here by showing you
the history of for example a single file
in my data set
for example the written and you can see
here um
this will be familiar for everyone who's
worked with it and i'm going to
quickly walk through what this is for
everyone who's new to git
you can see here a lock of everything
that has been done
to a single file in my data set each of
these
entries have certain elements
one important piece is the so-called
commit hash
that's um a hash or um
a 40 character string that uniquely
identifies each change or this
particular change
we have associated it with an author and
with a date and a time and
the author so my name and my email
address is
where the git config command has come
into place so i can associate the change
that has been done with the person who
did it and you can also see
there's a commit message that summarized
what what what has been done
i can now interact with this um
history by for example checking out
previous states
of the data set so if i identify a
precise change
with a part of the sash i can
take a look at the contents of the
readme file and you will see that the
original placeholder that i have
changed is now back and i can also
move forward in time again by going into
the most recent state of the data set
again and then i have the contents
of the readme in its most recent state
back
one thing that is useful to know
is where files came from so you have
seen that i have added
a web comic from the internet and if i
would share this data set with you
then you will just find this web comment
but you would have no idea where it
comes from
datalite has means to record the origin
of files in a dataset and
i will show you the command that does
this right now and i would like to come
back to tell you
why this is particularly helpful so what
i'm doing here is i'm hiding a little
easter egg
by taking another webcomic another xkcd
comic here's the url and downloading it
and saving it under the name
dot easter egg so it's a little hidden
file and
importantly i'm not doing this with the
wget command as
before but i'm using a data lag command
that is called data led download url
i can add a commit message to this
command
and if i execute it then dataled will go
to the url
register the url it finds there
downloads the file and saves it under
the commit message that i have given to
it
and if i open up this easter egg now
then
ah that is on my screen here i have a
nice little comic
and i will come back to why this is a
particularly helpful command
in a couple of minutes so
as a quick summary for now local version
control
is really easy data like create creates
your
uh creates an empty data set and there
are configurations that are useful but
the details of which i will tell you
more about
in a while a data set has a history
that can be used to track files and
modifications and it is
a good log that you can explore either
with the gitlab command
or any tool that visualizes get history
for example
if you want to save a data set state
then
you use the data that save command and
if you attach a commit message
then you can summarize the change for
view to you and for others to create
a nice data set history data let down
download url is a command that obtains
web content
and records its origin and also saves
the change
and datalet status is an important
command that reports the current state
of the data set
you should make sure that you would
always return
a clean data set state after data set
status that's
a good practice to have no untracked
modifications or files
so with these three commands essentially
data that created let's save and data
let's status
you have come from no version control to
really easy version control of any kind
of file
and now i'm going to go to the next
feature of dataled because version
control is only one aspect of data
management
but first of all um cool if there are
any questions
then then please let me know else i'm
going to go further
about consuming data sets uh i've shown
you that a data set can be created from
from scratch or in existing directories
but you can also install it from urls
and uh i'm going to show you
how to do this by going out of this
directory that i have created here
and cloning a data set that is available
on github
in the datalite dataset collection
if i uh clone a data set then here is
what it looks like
i can see in my screen to it here that
there are a lot of files
immediately after cloning and you can
browse the file links
but that is an incredibly fast operation
and the resulting data sets is really
lean
this is the case because
in all likelihood whenever you clone a
data set for most files
there is actually no file content but
only
what we refer to as metadata's file
names and availability of where this
file can be retrieved from
so i can install let's say a um
imaging data set that is several dozens
of gigabytes
large but if i have it on my computer
and then use
the disk usage command uh with yes h
flag to report back its size and human
readable
measures then it's just a fraction of
its total size
and if i then want to have file contents
in a data set
then i can retrieve them on demand so
whenever i actually
have to use them with the data that get
command this will then
retrieve file contents if i need this
uh one thing that this is useful for is
that i can now have access to more that
more data than my computer has disk
space for
uh here's an example of some large
neural imaging data sets that we use it
for
let's say the enki data set that takes
up about 1.5 terabytes of space on our
cluster
but if i have it just cloned then the
directory will be
only 1.5 gigabytes in size
one of the largest neural imaging sets
the human connectom
project data set it's 80 terabyte in
size
so terabyte 80 terabyte let that sink in
and contains 15 million files
and even though it is a substantially
large directory
with 50 gigabytes on a local computer
it's still only a fraction of the size
and it gets me access to all of the data
that is in there
so in principle it's plenty of data but
little just use it
i will show you that in this directory
that i've just cloned
so that's a directory that is filled
with machine learning books
and you can see that there are all of
these pdf files
in there not that many but a few and if
i want to
actually read some of these books i can
get them with the data let it command
in this case here you can see me getting
all of the
books that start with a capital d so you
can not only obtain individual files but
you can also obtain complete directories
or everything in the data set you can
make use of dropping
if you want to so
what is even better than being able to
get
content on demand for a disk space aware
computing workflows
is that you can also drop data if it's
not needed anymore
so after you have for example completed
your data analysis
and you want to free up disk space again
then you can use the data
get the data drop command to
get rid of the file content of the file
afterwards you will still have the
what we refer to as metadata so you have
still
the file name and you can retrieve it
on demand again but it doesn't take up
disk space on your computer anymore and
this allows
for a disk spacer where config computing
buffer flows so something that you can
do
now is you can install your input data
that can be terabytes large
then you can get the data that you need
because in some
computations you may not need all of the
data of a data set
you can compute your results on the
obtained data and then
afterwards drop the data so that your
disk
space is freed from the input data that
you
currently have no use anymore you can
extend that
also potentially to things that can be
automatically recomputed and i will show
you later
how this is done
[Music]
something whoops that
i wanted to show you still is how
data drop behaves with the two files
that i have added to my data set with
the two comics
and i want to do this to highlight the
difference between the data download url
command
and simply saving a file with no origin
recorded
if i drop the easter egg file that i
have
downloaded with data download url then
datalab will make sure that
it can re-retrieve the content on demand
so it checks the url that is registered
to see whether i can get it back and
only if it determines that this file can
be re-retrieved
it drops the file content if i want to
drop
a file where i don't have a second
or third origin recorded then datalit
will refuse
to drop this file unless i force it to
simply to safeguard
losing access to files that can't be
obtained from anywhere else
cool so if i have dropped something uh
some some file contents then you will
see that tools will not be able to open
it up anymore
but you can re-retrieve these files on
demand
and now datalet will re-obtain this
webcomic and it can be opened
again and yay i have a webcam
cool now the reason that this works is a
little bit technical in nature but i
want to give you a quick
um explanation of why that is
so uh data that you put in data sets
is either stored in git or in gitmixer
and one of the two
version control tools that data light
builds up on by default everything that
you put in a data set is annexed
and that means that git annex hashes
a file this ensures file integrity
because it hashes the content
to uniquely identify that file content
isn't changed
and then it moves the data into a
dataset annex
it then only commits the identity hash
and location information integrate which
is a really small piece of information
typically
only slightly more than 100 kilowatts
and
everything in the nx is then managed
with gitanics
this is because git is incapable of
handling all types of files well
so while it can handle small files um
get really buffs if you put too many or
two large files into it
git nx on the other hand handles all
types of files
very well another advantage that hit nx
has
is that it has that it allows to
share files
if you want to share them so while when
you share a data set everything that is
placed in git
is shared right away with everyone who
has a copy
you can keep annexed files private on a
profile level basis when you share the
data set
now all of this is a little bit
technical in nature and there's no need
to understand
the precise reasons for that now but i'm
saying that uh to prime you for
a differences in behavior that you see
in data sets for file start and git
versus kit annex
because these two tools handles files
differently
um files that are stored in git are
easily modifiable for example the readme
files
well files start and get annex don't
have
write permissions anymore to ensure
their
file integrity and they need to be
consciously unlocked with a specific
command so that they can be modified
and changed in new version i will show
you later how this
is not a problem at all when you're
actually working with the data
and nx contents are not available right
after cloning so this is everything
that you get with the data let get only
the content that is
stored in git is available right now now
if you have a data set
and you have annex data there and you
want to share it with someone who is not
in the same compute cluster
it's actually not a difficult thing but
you do need to make sure that you share
the nx data consciously with someone
else that you want to share your data
set with
you can interface all major opera
repository or storage providers that
there are
so if you're using dropbox any way or if
you're using
google drive anyway then you can uh then
data that and get annex have means too
easily with a few commands interface out
of the command out of these
services publish your unexcited there
and make them available
for others that have your data set and
everyone who uses your data set doesn't
really care or know
where data comes from because everything
is
secretly handled underneath the hood and
everyone gets the data wherever it may
be stored
with a data led get
it may be relevant to
modify whether files are stored in git
infidence and there are easy means to do
so
run procedures like the configuration
that i've used
applies configurations that are
tuned to specific use cases so the yoda
procedure for example will make sure
that anything that is in code
so all of your scripts are not annexed
and thus
shared right away and easily modify it
you can
also create such procedures and
distribute them in your institute
so that others can have your
configurations you can write
configurations yourself
and there are rules and examples and
tutorials in the datalit handbook
and you can also do it on a command
basis by for example attaching
other option to git to data that's safe
all right
i hope that i haven't missed questions
in the zoom chat
if so please let me know by speaking up
as i'm going to
continue with the feature of dataset
nesting
datalet has a seamless nesting mechanism
that allows you to link
datasets in sub dataset superdataset
hierarchies
and here you can see how a raw data set
is linked to a pre-processed data
data set that uses the raw data as its
input which in turn is linked to an
analysis data set that uses the
pre-processed data as its input which in
turn is linked
to a paper data set that uses the
analysis
for reporting and if i then share the
paper data set
i can consciously decide that i can
share the entire linkage the entire
history or track of data sets that
can bring a reader from the published
results that i have
to the pre-processed or raw data so that
they
can make sure to see the entire
evolution of everything that has been
done
one thing that um nesting is good for is
that it overcomes scaling issues with
large amounts of files if you've used
git then you may know that i get
struggles once data sets gets too large
but by nesting and being able to
recursively operate seamlessly across
dataset boundaries
you are able to basically go however
large you want to here's an example of
the human human connectome project data
set that we're
um packaging up or that we've packaged
up in a data set you can see that i'm
running a recursive status query from
the top level data set
throughout all of the sub data sets that
this dataset has
and i'm capable of applying this status
because
throughout all of the datasets there is
um
no so
from my feeling as a user it's a
monorepository
instead of several ones and with this i
am capable of version controlling almost
80 terabytes
and 15 million files more than 15
million files easily
the other advantage that dataset nesting
has is that it modularizes research
components
it makes it not only transparent
of let's say here's the raw data and
here's the pre-processed data that
originated from the raw data
but it also makes it easy to reuse
individual components so you can see in
this graphic that the preprocessed data
is kept as a modular data set that can
be installed
by two separate analysis so that the
reuse
of the preprocessed data is maximized
and
but this can also help us with access
management so if you don't want to share
the raw data when you publish your paper
say then you can not share this
individual component in your data
analysis
evolution but everything else
i can show you how this is done by
starting to configure or to
to prepare the data analysis that i'm
showing you in a couple of minutes and
what i'm doing here
is i'm installing a data set that i have
published
on github and importantly i'm using
datalet clone
not only with the url but i'm using data
lit clone with the dash d
that is short for data set option that
points to the root of the data set that
i'm currently in
what this does is it downloads or clones
the data set from github but it
registers it
in its most recent version into the data
set that i'm currently using
so now i have a nested set of data sets
and my super data set my analysis
has registered which version of
input data i have just installed and
where this
input data came from um you've also seen
that i've added
a path to the little clone command so
that
the datalet clone command does not
create a directory iris data but
actually saves it as input data
to make it obvious for everyone i'm
sharing the dataset with
that this is the input data that i'm
using
all right so as a quick summary up to
now
for data set consumption nesting data
led clone is the command that installs a
data set on your local computer
and you can install data sets on their
own from
local sources like paths or urls but you
can also install dataset as sub data
sets
within existing datasets with the
dataset option
when you obtain a dataset then you only
get
small files that are kept in git and
metadata about file availability
actual file content or annexed file
content
is retrieved via data that get on demand
data sets preserve their history and
while
i have installed the sub data set
[Music]
inside of an existing data set my super
data set has now
only recorded the version state of the
sub data set and the sub data set
still has its history um
there's someone who is too who was too
shy to ask something about version
control
if that question is still relevant then
please speak up
you can't say you're too shy even though
i put it there
it wasn't me uh who said that but i
still have a question
go for it don't overrun anyone um
[Music]
i we also or someone discussed it in the
chat regarding
word or axel and then uh michael hunker
replied that
it works with binary files or so but i
don't really know what that is
so maybe you could explain how that
would work um
sure so so there's an important
distinction between binary files and
non-binary files
you've seen that the readme file i was
able to get div
and get a precise difference of the
change that i have done
this works because a readme file is text
file
and not a binary file binary files
are stuff like anything that's not a
text file
including let's say excel spreadsheets
or word documents
and this makes it
so so you can still version control all
of the binary files
thing that you're not easily capable of
unless you install git extensions
is to visualize differences that you
place into these files
um and if you can i would always advise
to use
text files uh for everything so i'm
using large files which are text files
for my
scientific manuscripts i'm not using
excel or word documents
but let's say markdown files or tsv
files or csv files because there i have
this
option of visualizing the differences
nicely
does that help
um yeah i think so okay cool
uh that's then there's another question
about consuming data sets please just
um speak up uh and ask a question i'm hi
felix hi phil my question is
when i have let's say i i have two data
sets that i created
or three and then i think okay it would
be much better if i combine them in a
super data set
so not going from a large one super to
to then integrating them but
afterwards saying okay i want to combine
them is that
very complicated or should i start over
or what would you recommend
let me so let's see whether i understood
your question so you have three data
sets
and you want to have them in a single
data set
yes i want to recombine them or to
without out of them not nesting yeah or
nest them or yeah afterwards because to
organize it better you can you can
always nest them afterwards
that's not a problem at all um you can
also
um so so it's it's
you can just do it in one data set you
can do a datalit clone and then
install all of the other two data sets
uh
as as nested data sets there's also a
data that copy file command which you
could use to transfer all of the files
into um your other data set but nesting
is generally
a really nice and fast way of
of doing that and you could also
move the data sets into each other and
then save it to register it as a sub
data
so all of that is possible okay what
would you recommend for
for better overview i think nested with
my feeling but
the i like uh nesting because you will
make sure that you preserve
all of the version history of all of the
files
so if you have an extensive history in
the data sets that you've created and
then you later attempt to combine them
and i would always go for nesting
because that
makes sure that the files in your
datasets
all have their individual version
history but if it's something that
you've just created
and then you have a single entry in your
commit history then you could
also go for let's say data like copy
file
which transfers the file but not its
history
um into into a data set i would go for
nesting
but yeah perfect thank you i
have a very very basic question sorry
no no don't worry um i'm not sure
if i understand the difference between a
super
data set and a sub data set could you
please explain
right only difference is um
so any file can be both a super data set
and a sub data set any any data set that
has
a registered data set inside of it so
let's say the
my analysis data set and the input data
data set
that the the um upper level data set my
analysis becomes a super data set
simply because it has another data set
registered inside of it
but that's just a naming convention so
to say there's
not that much that's actually meaningful
about the distinction between the
two things it's just that a data set
that has another data set
registered inside of it gets an entry
about this data set and the version
state of this data set
and if i then would take my analysis and
install it
again as a sub data set into let's say a
paper data set
then my analysis data set will be a sub
data set
of the data sets i've installed it to
while it is
a super data set if you take the
perspective of the input data
okay so if just to check if i understood
correctly so the
the super data set would be like the
parent folder
and the sub data set would be like some
folders
inside the super data set so yeah yeah
that's
that's a good way to conceptualize it
doesn't necessarily need to be
like parent folder it can also be
several directory hierarchies up but
it's the data set on top of another data
set oh okay okay cool thank you very
much
cool thank you okay so now i can
introduce uh the topic of reproducible
analysis and that's something that i
really enjoy
about datalet because i know
about myself that my past self is the
worst collaborator
i don't answer to emails when i want to
find out
what the hell i had been thinking when i
did a particular thing
in let's say a data analysis and
datalit has means to
make data analysis very intuitive
transparent and automatically
reproducible
i will start this section by giving you
a short overview of some
of the recommendations or principles
that datalab provides for data analysis
on the next two slides one general
advice for data analysis is that
everything
in a data set should be kept very clean
and modular that's related
to the nesting feature that i've talked
about
if you do a data analysis then your
analysis
should be while you do it a super data
set
and every component that is a stand
alone component
let's say uh input data should become a
sub data set
so that you can not only link those two
um components but uh
also um intuitively identify them
um it is then important to keep
this modular structure clean by not
touching or modifying
the installed input data but any results
or computations
should be saved in your super data set
and not in the
installed input data set i uh have these
two graphics that
display this
for one on the left side for the entire
evolution
of the data analysis from raw data to
paper and
on the right hand side from the
directory structure perspective
of the super data set where you have a
code directory in which you place your
scripts and the input directory then
is an install dataset that is kept clean
and you will put your outputs not inside
of the inputs
sub dataset but inside of the
superdataset if it's if it fits
the difference if you have many many
many many many files that
would be too large for a single data set
but in general um
do not uh override or
change an installed sub dataset with
input date
second thing that's very important in
order to
keep your analysis portable and to share
them easily with others
is to keep super datasets self-contained
if you write a script and i have an
example of that
in a second then you should only use
relative
paths that is a path that starts
from the super data set and not an
absolute path
that would include everything on your
local
computer from the start of your file
system so on linux like home
user and then because an absolute path
would make your analysis not portable
everyone who would try to execute your
scripts
would fail to find the path on their
local computer
if they would rerun them
the next thing to make data analysis as
transparent and reproducible as possible
is that everything that is done in a
data set should be
recorded it should be recorded
where sub data sets come from it should
be reported
recorded where individual files came
from if you obtain them from web sources
for example
and it should be recorded how a
particular result came to be
and i'm going to show you how this can
be done with data led
in the next code section so
you've noticed that i have created this
my analysis data set and what i'm doing
now is to perform an actual analysis
this is only a simplified example
and i will do a more complex machine
learning example soon
this is just an example that exists to
start with
general concepts and commands what i'm
currently doing here is
i'm creating a code script for my data
analysis
this script
does is verbatim taken from
a classification classification tutorial
with python on the iris flower data set
that coincidentally is the data that i
have installed as the sub data set
there is nothing spectacular that's
happening here i'm sorry for the code
block that's written into the terminal
but everything that this script does
is it loads the input data you can see
it here
referenced as a relative path
it plots the data you can see that it
then saves this plot
also as a relative path in the super
data set not in the input data set
and then it trains a k-nearest neighbor
classifier
and saves the prediction into
the super data set as well if i
execute this code section i have to do
this because i'm remote controlling the
terminal you could just
do this in a
in a editor of your choice and then see
what has changed
you can see that i have actually written
the script into
a code directory into the code directory
under the namescript.pi
another thing that i've forgotten is
this
script also exemplifies how you can use
data led
in python scripts it's superfluous for
this example but i've included it just
for you to have a
have an example where you have actually
seen it how it's
how its python api is used so you can
see that here i'm importing
data let and then i can make sure that
the data is
obtained the data content before
anything is done with
data and that's just as an example of
how the data led api
can be used in python scripts now the
first thing that i'm doing is i'm
saving this untracked script apart from
commit messages
i can also use data.save to apply
a tag to a state of the data set
a tag is a git concept and it's just an
additional identifier
that can be used to identify a specific
commit
in this case i name my tag
with the version tag option ready for
analysis because
after i have this grip i'm ready for
analysis that makes it easier for me to
later identify the stage
in the data set importantly
i will make sure that i have a clean
data set state
because the command that i'm going to
run next
depends on a clean data set state unless
i
use specific options what i'm doing now
is
i'm executing a data.run command so i'm
printing it
into my terminal right now and i'm going
to explain what this command does
in this graphic datalet1
takes any command in this case
the command that i'm giving to it is how
i would execute
my python script from the command line
with an invocation of a python
interpreter
and this the path to the script data
that run will then
execute this command and
it will recognize or record everything
that has changed in response to
running this command in my data set and
saving that
under the commit message that i'm
specifying here
and that's a very easy way to associate
a command execution
uh together with the results that it
created
you can also see here that i'm
specifying
some optional flags
one is the input data the input flag
makes sure that any data specified in
this flag is retrieved prior to
computing
the command so i can make sure that the
data that run command
has a provenance record of the data that
is required for it in order to run
the output flag is not immediately
useful
but it will make recomputation easier
later on
and i will show you that also in a
second but first i'm going to run the
script
so the data that run command now
makes sure that the inputs are available
and gets any inputs
that i hadn't yet retrieved it then
executes
the script it runs really fast now and
it
computes uh these two outputs the powers
relationships png prediction reports and
saves them
under the commit message that i've
specified in the dataset this has
resulted in a run record in the data set
history
and the run record is everything that
you can see between
those boundaries here it's not
particularly human readable
but it is a machine readable record and
i will now show you
how this can become useful by showing
you what can be done with it
in order to do this i will clone the
very
same analysis data set that i have just
shown you here because a while ago
i created the same analysis and i
published it to github
so that i can now go to my github
account
and clone this very data set um
if i then use a
second datalet command
the comma a command called datalet rerum
i can identify the
commit hash that is associated with the
run record in this case i already know
it and i've included it here
and give it to datalit rerun then
datalit will take the machine readable
record
that is included in the data set history
obtain the data
that i specified as input rerun
everything
that has been done in this run record
it will unlock all of the outputs that
i've specified
to recompute and
modify them should they change so
now i was able to obtain an analysis
and to have a machine figure out what
has been done to obtain a particular
result
and automatically redo this this is a
very very powerful
feature that can help to make your
data analysis very easy to redo for
others
and everything that i have done now is
completely transparent so i can
inquire uh one of the results that
is now part of this data set about where
it actually came from just by taking a
look
at its git lock and you can see now that
the first time that i've created this
was in may and from this run record and
now
i have redone this in october
again however this
is not all of the provenance that i
could possibly
attach to a computation because
especially if the software requirements
of an analysis get more complex
i could share data and code with you and
you would still not be able to reproduce
what i have done simply because you lack
the appropriate packages if you have
tried to run this on your local computer
without
having the python packages it required
installed
then the command execution would have
definitely failed
so an important piece of provenance for
every data record
should be software and data that has
means
to also attach software environments to
data sets
and then execute all of the commands
that are given to a run record inside of
the software environment
the way that this works is by attaching
a software container to the data set so
the software container is a useful
invention
that is similar but more lightweight
than a virtual machine and allows to
wrap a complete software environment
into a single file
and there's a data led extension that is
called data led containers
that enables data to work with software
containers so the first thing i'm doing
here
is i'm going to add a software
environment into my data set
with the data light containers add
command this command
takes a url to um
seller i'm sorry there's a hidden
character somewhere in the code that i'm
pasting
and i apparently didn't fix
what this command does is it takes the
url
that i have given here in this case it's
url to singularity hub
and it retrieves the container image
that i've deposited here
and it saves it underneath the name
software it's an arbitrary name
in my data set you could also register
a container from let's say docker hub
and also from local paths so if you have
created a container locally you can add
it from a local path as well
in general though if you push it to
a container hosting platform such as
singularity or docker hub
then your software environment will be
available to everyone you share your
data set with though
so after i have registered my container
i can rerun the analysis inside
of the container also in a re-executable
provenance tracked way
with the data that contains one command
this command works just like datalet
containers
data let run but it takes the additional
option
of container name where you need to
specify
the container that you want to run
that's useful in the case of several
containers in your data set so
you can precisely specify which software
environment it is that you want to use
and if i execute this then the exact
same analysis
is redone but this time inside of the
software environment that i'm sharing in
conjunction
with data and code in this data set so
just like data that run data containers
run links data code command execution
but also
now software environments to
a data analysis so as a summary
datalet1 is a useful command that
records a command
and the impact so all of the files all
of the modifications
that it results in in the dataset
you should use it in a clean dataset
because it saves everything that results
from this command but there are options
to do it also in unclean data sets and
you can take a look at the digital
handbook to find out about this
everything that is specified as input is
retrieved prior to the command execution
if you have several inputs then you can
use one input
per input and everything that is
specified as output will be unlocked for
modifications
if the command is re-ran so it's a
useful thing if you want yourself or
others
to be able to quickly recompute
everything with every run command
else the annexed files may want to not
be modified right away
the data containers one command comes
from the extension data containers
and captures the software environment as
additional provenance
and this is a incredibly powerful
feature because it ensures that
computations are run in the desired
software environment you can use it with
docker containers
and with singularity containers and
datalet rerun finally can automatically
re-execute run records later
okay ah i'm sorry i forgot is there a
remaining question about get annex
okay great is there any question about
reproducible execution
cool
so you uh presented the data let run
command
and then you would uh basically do
one step of the analysis at a time but
usually
you have like a lot of different steps
in the analysis
and so is there a way to somehow uh
yeah integrate a lot of different steps
uh with
a workflow tool for example so you will
see an example of that
in the next demonstration that i'm doing
but to take a little bit of information
from the chat already so datalit is not
a workflow manager
so you you can't um
specify a cherry pick let's say
specific run executions only a range
of run executions so you can
re-execute more than one run record
you can execute all of the run records
if you want to or a specific set
but they are always executed in the
order that they have been executed in
your data set history i will show you
that
and also how it can be used productively
in the next demonstration
but i think um michael uh has already
posted a github issue that highlights
our development goal of maybe
integrating snake make
into data led so that more
workflow management features can be
can be used yeah that's great thanks i'm
already
reading the issue okay cool
thanks a lot no worries okay
now everything that i've shown you was
incredibly simple
and i fully acknowledged that that isn't
typically how data analysis
goes so you're not just getting a script
from somewhere and it works magically
at the first try and it's usually not
the case that in machine learning you
have a perfectly trained classifier
in the first iteration of your analysis
so what i now want to demonstrate here
is a slightly more complex
example it's still a tutorial so it
still doesn't incorporate all of the
times
that i don't know code scripts fail or
something i hope at least
but it showcases a more complex workflow
and uh also um related to the last
question that i got
how you can make data that even though
it's not a workflow manager
uh we re-execute a range
of of analysis steps to
work reproducibly and productively yes
there was another question
um i have a question in between on the
on the containers
because you nicely showed how to run
such a container you
didn't tell us how to build such a
container
um that's the one thing yeah second
question not in containers
but to the uh input and output
statements
um today i have an
analysis uh producing hundreds of files
and so do i have to specify beforehand
these hundreds of files
by hand or is there a command somewhere
automatically
very very very good point so first of
all
the output flag isn't required you can
just not specify it if you don't want to
but you don't need to know and you don't
need to know in advance which outputs
you produce
because everything all of the outputs
will be saved
even if they aren't specified as outputs
the output flag is only useful
for re-running the command later on
if you have any uh
rough idea and that idea can be as rough
as in which directory
these outputs are produced in
you can just use globbing or any
any more general file path that let's
say
either points to the entire super data
set
or um the directory in which you place
your outputs
uh and then just specify everything that
will happen in this directory
um so you don't so so let's say your
hundreds of files
are saved into a directory called output
you can specify
output and then a path to your output
directory and
uh that would result in this in a
perfectly valid specification
does that help yes thanks
that made a lot of sense and the the
second question is
right right right so i don't have a
tutorial on how to build containers
included in this workshop
um but there is a little bit of
information in the datalet handbook
personally i so the containers that i've
used here
are very simplistic and i've used them
i've described how i've built them
in the datalite handbook there's a
section on containers run
that has a hidden section that you can
expand where you can
take a look the container recipes are
also public on github so you can redo
them
and there are many tutorials that show
you how a container can be built
but it's also important to know that
there are many
pre-made containers available so
there are many registries you can find
them in public github repositories i
don't have
a link out of my head right now but
there are collections of useful
pre-configured containers that
for example are specifically tuned for
machine learning analysis and then
contain all of the python libraries that
you may need
and so forth so um while
making a container um is not like
so so it will take you probably more
than half an hour once you
if you start building your first
container but it's also not an
impossible task and there's there are
many resources out there to help
and uh plenty of containers are already
in existence and you can just pull them
from singularity or daca because they've
been shared by other people
for you to use so that wasn't entirely
entirely the answer to your question but
i hope nevertheless a
soothing information makes sense all
clear
um you point point me to the resources
that will be sufficient thanks a lot
yes uh later on i can add a link
to the to the github repository that
holds it but it's a very simple
container
um okay so unless there's
another question i will demonstrate
a machine learning example that is a
little bit more complex than
the simplistic script that i've just
executed so in this
analysis i'm taking uh i'm using
um i'm doing an image classification
and i'm using the imaginet imagenet
dataset that's a subset of the imagenet
dataset
this dataset has categories 10
categories
of files and i will
train different classifiers to classify
the category
that a specific file
belongs to first i will prepare an input
data set
as a standalone component then i will
configure and set up a
analysis data set i will prepare the
data as a first step in
pipeline i will train different models
and evaluate them and then i'm comparing
different models and then i'm going to
repeat all of this after updating
the data and pulling up pulling in
updates
so um what i'm doing first
is i'm creating a input data set i'm
just calling that imagenet
because that's the data set that i'm
using and
then i'm downloading input data the
imagenet
dataset is published as a amazon s3
rocket
and therefore i can take this url here
and get an archive zip archive
of all of these data sets what i'm doing
currently
takes a little while because i have to
download all of this data first
uh so i have some time to explain what
this command actually does
so uh the command is a little bit
complex that i'm using here but in a
sense it's a
data let down with url command while we
were writing this
tutorial we found out that there was
a bank that we safeguard with this
configuration function but the
next release of data that will make that
superfluous
and we use data download url to download
this archive
together with this commit message and
we're using the
archive option because it is an archive
and what this option triggers is
a very useful
feature where data that will not only
download and save the archive
but it will also unpack the data inside
of the zip archive
and importantly register the archive
internally as a separate data source
so the zipped archive is
hidden or stored inside of your dataset
in conjunction
to the unpacked data and
if you drop the input data or if you
drop the unzipped data the unpacked data
in your dataset
and then would want to reobtain it the
first
data source that is registered as a
backup
of where to get data is actually the
zipped archive that's still
in the internal workings of your data
set and only
if that archive is dropped as well
the complete archive from amazon will be
re-downloaded
again and currently you can see that
we have downloaded the archive and it's
already saved
but it is now initiating what is called
a special remote
and that is annex term for
storage locations for nxdata inside of
the dataset
and once that is done we're able to use
this data
and i'm going to take another zip of
water while we wait
cool so uh now you can see
uh that we have processed uh 13 000
files
and i can then go on to uh so
just to summarize that i have prepared a
standalone input data set
and i've added data with the data
download url archived command
but you could also just download the
data and then save it so if you have
something that's not available on the
web added to your data set save it
and even though there's an origin
recorded maybe because it doesn't have
an origin
you have the same result an input data
set that you can install
into your analysis so next i'm going to
create
my analysis data set uh i'm going to
know what i'm going to use this data set
for for my
machine learning project and therefore
i'm able to apply
a couple of configurations that i find
useful
one thing i'm doing is the text to git
configuration that's a configuration
that will place every text file into git
regardless of where it is in my data set
so that everything
is available right away and modifiable
and i'm using the yoda procedure again
to apply the useful structure
with default files for documentation
so next i
create a input directory that i call
data
and then i'm installing the input data
set that i have just created
as a sub data set into my analysis data
set
once this is done this is how the
directory hierarchy
in my data set looks like i'm only
showing you the directories
not the files because these individual
subdirectories here have thousands of
files in them
and the imagenet dataset is
structured as follows it has a train and
a validation set
and each of these sets has 10
sub-directories in them and each
sub-directory
is one class of images let's say
for example a set player or a golf ball
one thing that i'm also doing to prepare
a nicely configured data set is i'm
going to add a git ignore file
that is something that people that use
git will know about it's a file that you
can
use to keep files out of version control
and i'm doing that because i'm executing
python files that create
caches that i don't want to have version
controlled in any way
so what i'm doing i take another
download url command
and then i point it to some of the
useful
shared templates for git ignore files in
this case it's one
that is made for python project and i
save it as a get ignored
next thing i'm doing is i'm again
registering software
i have again made a container
to do this that contains all of the
python packages that i'm using
for my analysis and
i'm registering it again under the name
software but that's an arbitrary name
and again i have pushed that uh
container to singularity
that's my standard workflow i locally
built a recipe
in the git repository i publish that git
repository to github
i point my account on singularityhub to
that github repository
because that takes care of building the
container for me
so it saves me time and compute
resources on my local computer
and it makes it available for others and
then i can
take the singularity hub url to really
retrieve my container
and others can retrieve the container as
well
and we're almost done hopefully
that's a slightly larger container
than the one before
cool the next thing i'm doing is
i'm adding my first script into the
dataset
this script will prepare the input data
by associating the file names with the
label
that denotes the class of the image
i'm limiting for the sake of of time
the analysis here to two image classes
so the only thing that this script does
really is it takes every file that finds
in one directory uh this one and
labels the golf ball and it takes all of
the other files that it
finds in these directories here and
labels them as parachutes
again this is also something that can be
done in editor i'm just printing it to
the terminal in this here document in
order to have a remote control channel
during my presentation uh additional
status reveals that
this is now an untracked script and i
can save it
and i again add a version tag so that i
can
identify this state later on
and what i can do now is the data that
contains one command
that takes the script and applies it
to the input data so that i have
csv files that contain the labels
of the file names that i have for the
sake of time
i'm using the runtime max nx jobs
configuration here to parallelize
the retrieval of files
this way we can this way i don't have to
talk three minutes
but only a single minute while this
command
does its thing uh it's a couple of
thousand files that are
retrieved right now from the input data
set into
the local data set you can see that i
have specified
the different inputs so all of the
relevant directories in train
and validation as a separate input flag
and you can also see that i'm specifying
the outputs precisely here
the two csvs because i know from
the way that i've written the script
where
the results are saved under
and once the files are retrieved
this command will run the script produce
the csv files
and save them in the dataset
i also want to thank benjamin and
michael who
are developers so michael is my boss and
benjamin's
as a software developer and our team for
answering all of the questions in the
chat because i would have no way
of monitoring that
okay so to go on in my slides also i
have added a script for preparation
it labels training validation images
just the csv files
and i execute the preparation of the
data in your data that containers run
command
cool so that's all done
and the next thing i can do is i'll
start by just
getting the first uh training script uh
written down written down this is
again a python script if you're not used
to if you're not using python
you don't need to understand what this
script precisely does
but it takes a stochastic gradient
send classifier 10 iterations and trains
it
on the training data it then
takes the trained model and it dumps it
as a droplet object this is what um this
line here does
so uh this helps me to
get access to the train classifier also
outside of a python session because i
then have
a jobless object that is a trained
machine learning classifier that i can
apply to all
data that i would like to want to
i'm saving that
and then i'm also making sure that i
have a script that evaluates
my classifier later on and this script
loads the job lib object that is my
model
and applies it to the validation data
computes the accuracy and then prints
the accuracy to the terminal
and also saves them in a file in the
json file accuracy.js
i'm also saving this one and i'm also
again
attaching a version tag for me to later
identify this
now the first containers one command
that i'm doing is i will just
execute my training script
this will run the first script that i
have or the training to script that i've
just added
and this is just me in my machine
learning workflow
in the first step seeing how far i get
with what i have initially written up
and i can see already there's a
convergence warning
that's not ideal let's see um how well
this model
evaluates so i'm going to run the
evaluation script
so that it tests the trained classifier
and i can see ah well okay
that accuracy is not super great and i
also got the convergence warning so
let's
start to modify a script to improve
the performance what i'm doing here
is i'm replacing the number of
iterations
i'm increasing them from 10 to 100. i'm
doing this with a stream editor
you can also do it in a editor if you
want to so here's just the git div of
what has changed instead of 10 durations
my classifier takes 100.
i'm saving that change and then
i will make sure to rerun the
classification
and also the evaluation and this is
where i'm specifying more than
a single run command but i'm actually
supplying a range
of commit identifiers here you can see
that i'm using
the commit tag ready for analysis that
i've created
prior to training the model for the
first time
and the tag that i have attached after
evaluation and changing the number of
iterations
i'm using tags here because that's the
easiest way to do it without looking up
hashes
but you can also just copy and paste
commit hashes to identify ranges for
example
from your data set history
so i don't need to already know which
text to append where i can
specify any range within my history
it's just that i wanted to have a very
easy task
in my remote control terminal so what it
does now it
takes every run record that it finds
in between the two identifiers commit
identifiers i have specified
and it reruns them it will start with
the first one command that it finds
which is
training so it will retrain the
classifier now with the change
change script and then it will take the
next one command it finds which will be
the evaluation
and it will then re-evaluate the changed
model and in this case i can see that
the accuracy has improved which is nice
um and uh at this point in time i
already have two versions of accuracy
in my history and i have two different
train classifiers in my history that are
in this
model.zip file let's now
not only change the number of iterations
but actually let's also change the
classifier so what this
set of stream editing call does it
replaces
the sgd classifier with a
random forest classifier here is the
precise
change that has been introduced by these
two
commands so instead of importing sgd
classifier and importing run and forest
classifier
and then i'm using that one okay again
first we'll save this one again with
version pack
and then i will try to see whether that
can make a positive influence on my cues
again we'll rerun all of this but
i want to be a little bit more
i want to add another i want to showcase
another feature of the data that we run
command
that can be also very useful in this
workflow
by re-running the range of commits that
i'm specifying
not in the same branch that i'm
currently on
but in a different branch uh in this
case
i'm specifying a new branch called
random forest
datalite will create this new branch and
check it out it will be on top of the
version history that i'm currently at
and it will on there recreate or re-run
the run records that it finds in the
history
this is useful for two different reasons
one is that it allows me to compare the
models that i have
trained by just comparing branches and
the second is that i can quickly
change between the trained models the
model job lip files
simply by switching branches which is an
incredibly fast operation so even if you
have a really large model.lip file
because what is placed in git is really
small
branches switching is really fast so if
i'm
executing this and i want to have my
trained
random forest classification i'm going
to the running forest
branch if i want to go back to the
stochastic gradient descent i can go
back to the master launch
if i execute this
then you can see
that it does the same sequence of run
commands as before
but it currently does so on a different
branch that i can later
use to compare the results
so at the moment we're training a random
forest
classifier instead of a stochastic
gradient descent
classifier this will update the model
droplet file that holds the train
classifier
and once that is done we will
re-evaluate this model
and now i can see okay here the accuracy
has risen another tiny bit
if i want to get a quick difference
between
the prettiest accuracy and the one that
i have gotten now
i can do this with a variety of things
but one way to do this is by using
the div to compare the current branch
i'm on random forest with the master
branch
in particular regarding
this specified file accuracy.json
so if i do this i can see the
um difference in accuracies between the
two models
and if i check out the master branch
again
and then take a look at the accuracy
file then i'm back to the
stochastic gradient accuracy because
everything i've done with the random
forest model is done in a different
branch
now the last thing i want to take to
tell you or show you in this workflow
is uh the
the case of change data so let's say you
have an
evolving input data set um
for this i'm going to go back into the
input data set and i couldn't find a
nice
image to add but i'm just modifying this
data set by removing
an image that is inside of it so i'm
taking the input data set the imagenet
dataset
and i'm removing one file that i've
used if i then
query the datalet state of the dataset
then i can see that this is a deletion
and i can save this file
so that i now have evolved this input
dataset's history further
to where i have registered it in the
analysis dataset
i can now go into the registered sub
data set so a clone
of this original data set and run a data
lab command that is called data led
update merge
in order to pull in the changes that
come from the original data set
into my data set clone so if i now take
a look at the
block then you can see that
there is the initial downloading and
content adding but there's also the most
recent change that i've just done
which is removing an image and if i want
to keep this change i can
stay put if i want to instead go back
to the complete state of the data set
then i could for example check out
this commit to be back at the
originally registered state something
that i want to draw your attention to
is how a sub data set state is
represented in the super data set
so if i'm now back in the super data set
ml
project and then query the data set
state
then you will see that the sub data set
is modified because
it changed from the previously
registered version
to a new version and i can make this
change
transparent by simply saving it with a
data let's say command and i'm doing
that
right now and afterwards
with this changed input data i can rerun
the entire workflow that i've done so
the
three run commits that uh do uh
prepping model training and evaluation
by specifying a range again and
this is not a
workflow management tool in any sense
but i hope
that this has demonstrated in a way
how um git concepts and um
such as tags or branches can be used in
conjunction with run records to get
some sort of manage a workflow
management like fear
to such an analysis and how that can be
helpful
so to summarize uh this little workflow
with some tips and tricks
for machine learning applications with
datalet
you should take a standalone input
dataset
to keep the input data extendable
reusable
so forth you can register your sub
dataset
in precise versions and you can update
it into the newest
state or to previous states if you want
to
you should make sure to add software
containers if you can or if you have a
complex software setup because that aids
greatly
with rupee usability and it's also
helpful for yourself if you have ever
to update your computer you can share
this
software environment and you can
preserve it re-executable run records
can capture all of this provenance
especially if you use it in conjunction
with data like containers and the
container that you register
and if you have stuff that requires
command
and parameterization a run record is
also one way of capturing all of that
if you are familiar with git workflows
then those can be
very helpful elements in machine
learning workflows
so while datalit is no workflow manager
can check out tags it can check out
branches and you can
switch easy and fast between results of
different models or identify different
states
and so to summarize this complete
workshop on datalet i think the takeaway
that i want to show you
on why to use datalite is that mistakes
aren't forever anymore
you can version control any file
regardless of how large it is
and make sure that you can interact with
its history
and keep track of its entire evolution
you don't need short
memory anymore if you have run records
that can be helpful for yourself
in order to re-run a computation or a
range of computations and it can be
helpful for others to find out what was
done
you have the feature of what i call just
uses usage magic where you have
access to more data then your hard drive
has space if you
have data that is stored in
a remote location and you have wonderful
collaboration and updating mechanisms
that bring the collaboration mechanisms
from software development
into scientific analysis workflows so
alice can share her data with bob
and when she fixes a mistake then she
can push the fix and bob
can update to the most recent version of
the data
if bob makes a change then alex alice
can also make sure to get bob's changes
and vice versa and vice versa and vice
versa
and lastly the transparency is a major
feature
because shared data sets keeps the
history data that has not only a way to
make it very transparent to you what has
been done into your colleagues
but it can also help to make science
more transparent and open
and you can uh share a data object
research data object with all of the
provenance
it needs and if you have a project that
you are
pointed to by a supervisor and you are
tasked with figuring out what has been
done
you don't need to track down the person
who has worked on that project
and interrogate them at gunpoint you can
simply ask their project what was done
cool and with that
i want to thank you for your attention i
hope that
everything was clear but if you have any
questions
about the machine learning example that
i've just shown you
um or if you have also any questions
about data led
then please don't hesitate speak up we
can chat
and with that i want to yeah thank you
all
for your attention